---
layout: post
title: A Borel set that is neither $F_{\sigma}$ nor $G_{\delta}$
tags: [analysis, measure-theory]
---

$F_{\sigma}$ and $G_{\delta}$ sets are two classes of sets which are quite ubiquitous in the Borel $\sigma$-algebra of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$.
Their names come from a combination of French and German. $F_{\sigma}$ comes from the French words "fermé" meaning "closed" and
"somme" meaning, well, "sum". Together the meaning is a union of closed sets. So a set is $F_{\sigma}$ if it is a countable union of closed sets.
Similarly, $G_{\delta}$ comes from the German words "gebiet" meaning an open set and "durchschnitt" meaning intersection.
So a set is  $G_{\delta}$ if it the countable intersection of open sets.

$F_{\sigma}$ and $G_{\delta}$ sets play an important role in Lebesgue measure theory. For example, it is a fact that a set $E\subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n}$ is 
measurable if and only if there exists an $F_{\sigma}$ set $F$ and $G_{\delta}$ set $G$ such that $F \subseteq E \subseteq G$ and $\mu(E - F) = 0$, $\mu(G - E) = 0$.
In other words, any measurable set can be approximated by an $F_{\sigma}$ and $G_{\delta}$ set.

Of course every $F_{\sigma}$ and $G_{\delta}$ set is Borel (as the countable union or intersection of Borel sets), but finding a Borel
set that is neither $F_{\sigma}$ nor $G_{\delta}$ is not so intuitive. Our strategy for constructing such a set will be to create two
disjoint sets $A$ and $B$ such that $A$ is not $F_{\sigma}$ and $B$ is not $G_{\delta}$. Then it will follow that $E := A\cup B$ is neither.

Let $B := [0,1] \cap \mathbb{Q}$, where $\mathbb{Q}$ is the rationals.

**Claim 1:** $B$ is not $G_{\delta}$.

*Proof of Claim 1.*
By way of contradiction assume $B$ is $G_{\delta}$. Then $B = \cap_{n=0}^{\infty}U_{n}$ where $U_{n}$ open for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$.
At this point we are going to set ourselves up to use the [Baire category theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baire_category_theorem) in order to derive a 
contradiction. Consider $X := [0,1]$ as a complete metric subspace of $\mathbb{R}$. Then $B$ is dense in $X$ and so $U_{n} \cap [0,1]$ is dense in $X$ since 
for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ since $U_{n} \supseteq B$. Now let $\lbrace q_{n} \rbrace_{n=0}^{\infty}$ be an enumeration of $B$, i.e. an 
enumeration of the rationals in $[0,1]$. Then 
$[0,1] \cap U_{n} - \lbrace q_{n} \rbrace$ is open (as a subset of $X$) and dense (in $X$) for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$. By the Baire category theorem, 
\begin{equation}
\bigcap_{n=0}^{\infty} [0,1]\cap U_{n} - \lbrace q_{n} \rbrace \neq \emptyset.
\end{equation}
But this of course is impossible.
$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$ Claim 1}$$

Now let $A := (2,3) \cap \mathbb{Q}^{c}$.

**Claim 2:** $A$ is not $F_{\sigma}$.

*Proof of Claim 2.* Once again we will proceed by way of contradiction. So suppose $A$ is $F_{\sigma}$. Then
\begin{equation}
A \cup \bigcup_{n=0}^{\infty}(-\infty, 2-2^{n}]\cup[3+2^{-n},\infty) = A\cup [2,3]^{c}
\end{equation}
is $F_{\sigma}$. This implies that $(A\cup [2,3]^{c})^{c} = \mathbb{Q} \cap [2,3]$ is $G_{\delta}$. But the argument in Claim 1 shows this 
is impossible (just replace $[2,3]$ by $[0,1]$).
$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$ Claim 2}$$

So we have shown that $A$ is not $F_{\sigma}$ and $B$ is not $G_{\delta}$. It remains to prove that their union is not $F_{\sigma}$ or $G_{\delta}$.

**Claim 3:** $E$ is not $F_{\sigma}$.

*Proof of Claim 3.* By way of (you guessed it!) contradiction, suppose $E$ is $F_{\sigma}$. Then $E = \cup_{n=0}^{\infty}F_{n}$ where $F_{n}$ is closed for all 
$n \in \mathbb{N}$. Thus
\begin{equation}
A = [2,3] \cap E = [2,3] \cap \bigcup_{n=0}^{\infty}F_{n} = \bigcup_{n=0}^{\infty}[2,3]\cap F_{n}
\end{equation}
is $F_{\sigma}$. This contradicts Claim 2.
$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$ Claim 3}$$

**Claim 4:** $E$ is not $G_{\delta}$.

*Proof of Claim 4.* Since we love contradictions so much, let go for one more. Assume $E$ is $G_{\delta}$. Then $E = \cap_{n=0}^{\infty}U_{n}$ where
$U_{n}$ is open for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$. Hence
\begin{equation}
B = E\cap (-1/2, 3/2) = \bigcap_{n=0}^{\infty}U_{n}\cap (-1/2, 3/2)
\end{equation}
is $G_{\delta}$. This contradicts Claim 1.
$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$ Claim 3}$$

There you have it! A Borel set that is neither $F_{\sigma}$ nor $G_{\delta}$.
