Before proceeding let's confuse ourselves with several definitions.

**Definition 1:** (Absolutely continuous measures) *Suppose $\mu$ and $\nu$ are measures on a measurable space
$(\Omega, \mathcal{S})$. We say that $\mu$ is __absolutely continuous__ with respect to $\nu$ if
$\mu(A) = 0$ whenever $\nu(A) = 0$, for $A \in \mathcal{S}$. This is often denoted as $\mu \ll \nu$*.

**Definition 2:** (Singular measures) *We say the measure $\mu$ is __singular__ with respect to $\nu$, often denoted $\mu \perp \nu$,
if there exists a set $A \in \mathcal{S}$ such that $\mu(A) = \nu(\Omega - A) = 0$*.

**Definition 3:** (Absolutely continuous functions) *Suppose $-\infty < a < b < \infty$ and $f : [a,b] \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$. We
say that $f$ is __absolutely continuous__ if for all $\epsilon > 0$, there exists a $\delta > 0$ such that for every finite
disjoint collection $\{(a_k, b_k)\}_{k=1}^{n}$ of open intervals in $(a,b)$*,
$$\text{ if } \sum_{k=1}^{n}[b_{k} - a_{k}] < \delta \text{ then } \sum_{k=1}^{n}|f(b_{k}) - f(a_{k})| < \epsilon.$$

**Definition 4:** (Singular functions) *A real-valued function is said to be __singular__ if its derivative is 0 almost everywhere with respect to
Lebesgue measure $m$*.

Now that we have successfully abused some terminology, let's talk about the relationship between the Lebesgue decomposition theorems.

There are two forms of the Lebesgue Decomposition Theorem: 

**Lebesgue Decomposition Theorem for Measures:** (LDT1). *Suppose $\mu$ and $\eta$ are $\sigma$-finite measures on a measurable space $(\Omega, \mathcal{S})$.
Then $\mu$ can be decomposed as the sum of two measures, $\nu$ and $\lambda$, where $\nu \ll \eta$ and $\lambda \perp \eta$.* ($*$)

**Lebesgue Decomposition Theorem for Functions of Bounded Variation:** (LDT2). *Suppose $f : [a,b] \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ is of 
[bounded variation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounded_variation). Then $f$ can be decomposed
as the sum of two functions, $g$ and $h$, where $g$ is absolutely continuous (in the sense of Definition 3) and
$h$ is singular (Definition 4). In particular, we can write*
\begin{equation}
g(x) := \int_{a}^{x}f'\ dm \ \text{ and } \ h(x) := f(x) - \int_{a}^{x}f'\ dm\ \text{ for all }x \in [a,b].
\label{1}
\end{equation}

Note that if $f$ is of bounded variation, $f'$ exists almost everywhere ($m$). Hence the $g$ and $h$ in $\eqref{1}$ are well-defined.

Considering the overlap of terminology
it is not surprising that these theorems are closely related. In fact LDT1, when restricted to the 
measurable space $([a,b], \mathcal{B}[a,b])$ and when the second measure is Lebesgue measure $m$, 
can be seen as a special case of LDT2, where $-\infty < a < b < \infty$
and $\mathcal{B}[a,b]$ denotes the Borel $\sigma$-algebra over $[a,b]$.
More precisely, we can prove the following weaker version of LDT1 using LDT2.

**Theorem:** (Weak LDT1). *Suppose $\mu$ is a finite measure on $([a,b], \mathcal{B}[a,b])$. Then there exists (finite) measures $\nu$ and $\lambda$
on $([a,b], \mathcal{B}[a,b])$ such that $\mu = \nu + \lambda$ where $\nu \ll m$ and $\lambda \perp m$.*

$Proof.$ Without loss of generality assume $a = 0$ and $b = 1$. Let
$$ F(t) := \mu([0, t]), \ t \in [0,1], $$
i.e. $F$ is the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of $\mu$. 
Since $F$ is non-decreasing, $F$ is of bounded variation. Thus, by LDT2, we can decompose $F$ as the sum of an absolutely continuous function 
$G$ and a singular function $H$ given by
$$ G(x) := \int_{0}^{x}F'\ dm \ \text{ and } \ H(x) := F(x) - \int_{0}^{x}F'\ dm. $$
First we will show that $G$ and $H$ are valid cdf's.

**Claim 1:** $G$ and $H$ are non-decreasing and right-continuous.

*Proof of Claim 1:* This is trivial for $G$. Now for $H$, let $x,y \in [0,1]$ such that $x > y$. Since $F$ is non-decreasing,
$\int_{y}^{x}F'\ dm \leq F(x) - F(y)$. Hence,
$$ H(x) - H(y) = F(x) - F(y) - \int_{y}^{x} F'\ dm \geq F(x) - F(y) - [F(x) - F(y)] = 0. $$
Therefore $H$ is non-decreasing. Now, by the right-continuity of $F$ and the continuity of the integrand,
$$ \lim_{y\rightarrow x^{+}} H(y) = \lim_{y\rightarrow x^{+}} F(y) - \int_{0}^{y}F'\ dm = F(x) - \int_{0}^{x}F'\ dm = H(x). $$
$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$ Claim 1}$$

By Claim 1, $G$ and $H$ are the cdf's of two measures, call them $\nu$ and $\lambda$, respectively. More precisely, $\nu$ and $\lambda$
are [Lebesgue-Stieltjes measures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lebesgue%E2%80%93Stieltjes_integration#Definition) generated by $G$ and $H$.
It follows that $\mu = \nu + \lambda$ where $\nu$ is given explicitly by
$\nu(A) = \int_{A}F' dm$ (a good exercise is to verify this yourself, see $**$ below).
Thus $\nu \ll m$. Further, since $H' \equiv 0$ a.e. ($m$), $\lambda(A) > 0$ if and only if $A$ contains a discontinuity point of $H$.
But the discontinuity points $\mathcal{D}$ of $H$ form a countable set (why is this?). Therefore $0 = m(\mathcal{D}) = \lambda([0,1] - \mathcal{D})$.
Hence $\lambda \perp m$ by definition.
$$\tag*{$\Box$}$$

> ($*$) A nice proof of a general form of LDT1 can be found [here](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1404.1871v1.pdf).  
($**$) To show that $\mu(A) = \nu(A) + \lambda(A)$, one could first show that $\mu$ and $\mu' := \nu + \lambda$ agree over a suitable
[$\pi$-system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pi_system), $\mathcal{C}$, for which $\mathcal{B}[0,1] = \sigma\langle \mathcal{C} \rangle$,
where $\sigma\langle \mathcal{C} \rangle$ denotes the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathcal{C}$
(the set of all subintervals of $[0,1]$ is a good bet). Then, after verifying that $\mu'$ is a valid measure, define 
$\mathcal{L} := \{A : A \in \mathcal{B}[0,1], \mu(A) = \mu'(A)\}$. It is easy to show that $\mathcal{L}$ is a 
[$\lambda$-system (aka Dynkin-system)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynkin_system). Thus, it follows from the 
[$\pi$-$\lambda$ theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pi_system#The_.CF.80-.CE.BB_Theorem) that $\mu = \mu'$ on all of $\mathcal{B}[0,1]$.
